[red-knot] Type inference for comparisons between arbitrary instances (#13903)
astral-sh/ruff: crates/red_knot_python_semantic/resources/mdtest/comparison/instances/membership_test.md

# Comparison: Membership Test

In Python, "membership test operators" refer to `in` and `not in` operator. To customize their behavior, classes can implement methods like `__contains__`, `__iter__`, or `__getitem__`.

For references, see:

- <https://docs.python.org/3/reference/expressions.html#membership-test-details>
- <https://docs.python.org/3/reference/datamodel.html#object.__contains__>

## Implements `__contains__`

Classes can support membership tests by implementing the `__contains__` method:

```py
class A:

>     def __contains__(self, item: str) -> bool: ...

Author: Thank you so much for taking the time to make all these detailed adjustments—it must have been quite a task!

I have a follow-up question regarding the points you mentioned. Should we also add `from __future__ import annotations`?

```py
from __future__ import annotations  #required?!

class A:
    def foo(self, o: A) -> A:
        return A()
```

>     def __contains__(self, item: str) -> bool: ...

Reviewer: Yes, we should probably add `from __future__ import annotations` where we are relying on these self-annotations. We actually understand them even without it, because we don't currently model the fact that the class body scope runs immediately at class definition time, but probably we should model that correctly in future.

# Comparison: Membership Test

> In Python, "membership test operators" refer to `in` and `not in` operator. To customize their behavior, classes can implement methods like `__contains__`, `__iter__`, or `__getitem__`.

Author: Thanks for catching that! I've formatted it with an 80-character limit 🙂

# Comparison: Membership Test

> In Python, "membership test operators" refer to `in` and `not in` operator. To
> customize their behavior, classes can implement methods like `__contains__`,
> `__iter__`, or `__getitem__`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In Python, the term "membership test operators" refers to the operators
`in` and `not in`. To customize their behavior, classes can implement one of
the special methods `__contains__`, `__iter__`, or `__getitem__`.
```

For references, see:

- <https://docs.python.org/3/reference/expressions.html#membership-test-details>

> - <https://docs.python.org/3/reference/datamodel.html#object.__contains__>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- <https://docs.python.org/3/reference/datamodel.html#object.__contains__>
- <https://snarky.ca/unravelling-membership-testing/>
```

## Implements `__contains__`

Classes can support membership tests by implementing the `__contains__` method:

```py
class A:
    def __contains__(self, item: str) -> bool:
        return True

reveal_type("hello" in A())  # revealed: bool
reveal_type("hello" not in A())  # revealed: bool
# TODO: should emit diagnostic, need to check arg type, will fail
reveal_type(42 in A())  # revealed: bool
reveal_type(42 not in A())  # revealed: bool
```

## Implements `__iter__`

Classes that don't implement `__contains__`, but do implement `__iter__`, also
support containment checks; the needle will be sought in their iterated items:

```py
class StringIterator:
    def __next__(self) -> str:
        return "foo"

class A:
    def __iter__(self) -> StringIterator:
        return StringIterator()

reveal_type("hello" in A())  # revealed: bool
reveal_type("hello" not in A())  # revealed: bool
reveal_type(42 in A())  # revealed: bool
reveal_type(42 not in A())  # revealed: bool
```

## Implements `__getitems__`

> The final fallback is to implement `__getitem__` for integer keys: Python will
> call it with 0, 1, 2... until it either finds the needle (returning True for the
> membership test) or `__getitem__` raises IndexError, which is silenced and
> returns `False` for the membership test.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The final fallback is to implement `__getitem__` for integer keys. Python will
call `__getitem__` with `0`, `1`, `2`... until either the needle is found
(leading the membership test to evaluate to `True`) or `__getitem__` raises
`IndexError` (the raised exception is swallowed, but results in the membership
test evaluating to `False`).
```

```py
class A:
    def __getitem__(self, key: int) -> str:
        return "foo"

reveal_type("hello" in A())  # revealed: bool
reveal_type("hello" not in A())  # revealed: bool
reveal_type(42 in A())  # revealed: bool
reveal_type(42 not in A())  # revealed: bool
```

## Wrong Return Type

> Python coerces the results of containment checks to bool, even if `__contains__`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Python coerces the results of containment checks to `bool`, even if `__contains__`
```

class CheckIter: ...
class CheckGetItem: ...

class CheckIterIterator:
    def __next__(self) -> CheckIter:
        return CheckIter()

class A:
    def __contains__(self, item: CheckContains) -> bool:
        return True

    def __iter__(self) -> CheckIterIterator:
        return CheckIterIterator()

    def __getitem__(self, key: int) -> CheckGetItem:
        return CheckGetItem()

reveal_type(CheckContains() in A())  # revealed: bool

# TODO: should emit diagnostic, need to check arg type, should not fall back to __iter__ or __getitem__
reveal_type(CheckIter() in A())  # revealed: bool
reveal_type(CheckGetItem() in A())  # revealed: bool

class B:
    def __iter__(self) -> CheckIterIterator:
        return CheckIterIterator()

    def __getitem__(self, key: int) -> CheckGetItem:
        return CheckGetItem()

reveal_type(CheckIter() in B())  # revealed: bool
# Always use `__iter__`, regardless of iterated type; there's no NotImplemented
# in this case, so there's no fallback to `__getitem__`
reveal_type(CheckGetItem() in B())  # revealed: bool
```

## Invalid Old-Style Iteration

If `__getitem__` is implemented but does not accept integer arguments, then

> membership test is not supported and should emit a diagnostic.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
membership test is not supported and should trigger a diagnostic.
```

class AlwaysTrue:
    def __contains__(self, item: int) -> Literal[1]:
        return 1

class AlwaysFalse:
    def __contains__(self, item: int) -> Literal[""]:
        return ""

# TODO: it should be Literal[True] and Literal[False]
reveal_type(42 in AlwaysTrue())  # revealed: @Todo
reveal_type(42 not in AlwaysTrue())  # revealed: @Todo

# TODO: it should be Literal[False] and Literal[True]
reveal_type(42 in AlwaysFalse())  # revealed: @Todo
reveal_type(42 not in AlwaysFalse())  # revealed: @Todo
```

## No Fallback for `__contains__`

If `__contains__` is implemented, checking membership of a type it doesn't
accept is an error; it doesn't result in a fallback to `__iter__` or
`__getitem__`:

```py
class CheckContains: ...
class CheckIter: ...
class CheckGetItem: ...

class CheckIterIterator:
    def __next__(self) -> CheckIter:
        return CheckIter()

class A:
    def __contains__(self, item: CheckContains) -> bool:
        return True

    def __iter__(self) -> CheckIterIterator:
        return CheckIterIterator()

    def __getitem__(self, key: int) -> CheckGetItem:
        return CheckGetItem()

reveal_type(CheckContains() in A())  # revealed: bool

> # TODO: should emit diagnostic, need to check arg type, should not fall back to __iter__ or __getitem__

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# TODO: should emit diagnostic, need to check arg type,
# should not fall back to __iter__ or __getitem__
```
